of this evening, the book of Genesis, the 25th chapter, Genesis chapter number 25 this evening.
And we have had the opportunity now for some time to be studying through the book of Genesis.
And it's been a great encouragement to me. I trust to you as well. And this is lesson number 59
through the book of Genesis. I won't tell you when we started, but it's been a while and we will
eventually. So there's 50 chapters. So we're halfway. Amen. Isn't that awesome? And praise
the Lord. And Genesis 25, we'll be looking at verses 1 through 11 this evening. And of course,
we were first introduced to Abram back at the end of Genesis chapter number 11. It was in the 12th
chapter in the first part of the chapter that we read about the call that God placed on the life
of Abram and his response to that call of departing from the Ur of the Chaldees. And he
went to a place whether he knew not. And we find that as we've traced the steps of Abram, Abraham
became his name in Genesis chapter number 17. We've had the privilege from the end of chapter
number 11 all the way through the first part of here, chapter 25 this evening, to really trace
the steps of a hundred years of this man's life. Isn't that exciting? And as you study the life
of Abraham, of course, his name is very familiar to us and to many around the world. He is one of
the patriarchs. He is one that often was referenced as you would study through the gospels. And
you look at his course testimony throughout the word of God. And this evening, as we come to this
chapter where his death and burial are recorded, I trust it'll be a great encouragement to each of
us as we consider really a life well lived. A life in which, yes, had ebbs and flows, had
mountain peaks and valleys, had disappointments and great victories. And you think about the
way in which we can relate to a life like that because we too live in this flesh and we live
in this fallen world. And there are days in which we deal with adversity and great opposition and
disappointment. But we find that our God is always faithful and he is always trustworthy and dependable.
He always does what he says he will do. And as we look at the life of Abraham tonight, as we look
at this portion, I trust that you'd be encouraged. Look at verse number nine with me. We'll get right
into the message. The Bible says this in verse number nine, and his sons, Isaac and Ishmael,
buried him in the cave of Machpelah in the field of Ephraim, the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is
before Mamre. I've just titled the message this evening from that phrase in verse number nine,
Isaac and Ishmael buried Abraham. As we look at the portion of scripture, if you're taking notes
this evening, what you notice first of all, the descendants of Abraham. We begin reading this
portion of scripture and we find that as you enter down into and get familiar with the timeline,
you find that Abraham, when he dies, is 175 years old. And so therefore, we would find that this
particular text of scripture that is given to us takes place 38 years after the death of Sarah.
Now, of course, we read and studied the portion of scripture a few weeks ago in Genesis 23,
where the Bible told us of the death and burial of Sarah and how that Abraham came to mourn for
Sarah and to weep for her. And we find that at that time he was 137 years old, and now we find
that he's 175 years old. And so these 38 years have now passed, and the Bible begins by telling
us in verse number one of the text of scripture, then again, Abraham took a wife and her name
was Ketorah. We find that as we read the next few verses of scripture that we'll read of the sons
that were born to Abraham through Ketorah. But before we look at that, as we think about the
descendants of Abraham, of course, we'd first have to go back to Genesis chapter number 16
and see the birth of Ishmael. We find that he, of course, was the one that was born really after the
flesh, Hagar being the the mother of Ishmael. We understand the disappointment that was contained
within the portion of scriptures we studied many months ago and had the opportunity to see how that
through the counsel of Sarah and all that had taken place. And Ishmael is born, and we find
that it was after the flesh. This was not the son of promise, as we'll find. That, of course,
was Isaac. And we find that in chapter number 21, the Bible tells us that God gave the instruction
to Abraham to cast out Ishmael along with Hagar. We find that as we study that portion of scripture
and coupled it with the book of Galatians that Paul references under the inspiration of the Holy
Spirit of God that this is an allegory. And the reality is that the son of the flesh cannot dwell
with the son of promise. We think about the truth of being redeemed, and we think about the old nature
and the new nature, and we understand that the old nature must be mortified. It must be crucified.
We must walk in the spirit so that we do not fulfill the lust of the flesh. And what great
truth is given to us there. We find that as they were cast out according to Genesis 21, verses 20
and 21, that he, Ishmael, dwelt in the wilderness of Paran. We also find that the Bible tells us
that his mother, Hagar, took him a wife out of Egypt. Now, we understand that that would be
understood. Not only the scriptures tell us that, but she, of course, Hagar, was from Egypt, and so
it would make sense that she would return to find a wife for her son from Egypt. We then read about
Isaac, the birth of Isaac. It's given to us in Genesis 21, and as we would look at and refer to
the birth of Ishmael as being after the flesh, we would find this birth of Isaac. He is the son of
promise. We find that the Bible tells us in Genesis 21, in verse number one,
and the Lord visited Sarah as he had said, and the Lord did unto Sarah as he had spoken.
For Sarah conceived and bare Abraham a son in his old age at the set time of which God had spoken
to him, and Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare to him,
Isaac. Now, God had given many promises to Abraham over the years with regard to this son that would
be born, but, of course, Abraham and Sarah to have a son and the covenant that would be established,
and we find the fulfillment of that birth there in Genesis 21. We find here in our text of
Scripture, well, last week in Genesis 24, we read about the wife of Isaac, Rebekah. We looked at the
entirety of chapter 24, and we find in verse number five, the Bible says of Isaac, of Genesis 25,
that Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac. We now read of these sons of Keturah. It tells us
that Abraham took a wife. Her name was Keturah. Notice in verses two and three, the Bible tells
us, and she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Midan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah, and
Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan, and the sons of Dedan were Asheram, and Latusham, and Lamumim,
and the sons of Midian, Ephah, and Epher, and Hanok, and Abida, and Eldah. All these were the
children of Keturah. And so you read of the sons, Zimran, Jokshan, Midan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah,
and then the grandsons that are mentioned there, the descendants of these particular sons that are
listed for us as well. But we find that in this list, of course, many Arab nations would come from
these sons that were born. We find that the name that is most familiar out of this list of
names that is provided to us of these sons of Keturah would be that of Midian. Of course,
as you look at Bible history and you read through the Scriptures, you will read many things with
regard to the Midianites. And as you read about the Midianites and you read about some of the
adversity between the descendants of Midian, the Midianites, and the people of God, the nation of
Israel, you will see that there was some real hostility between the descendants of Midian and
the descendants of Isaac. And we see that throughout the pages of Scripture. And so
Midian is absolutely the most familiar, biblically speaking, that we see. But these particular sons
of Abraham would be where many Arab nations would, of course, come from. And we read of those
things historically. It tells us that Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac in verse number five.
We see in verse number six, it says this, but unto the sons of the concubines which Abraham had,
Abraham gave gifts and sent them away from Isaac, his son, while he yet lived eastward unto
the east country. And so we notice in verse number six, of course, in verse number five, it tells us
that Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac. There were some gifts that were given to these
sons that are mentioned in verses two and three, and to these sons were given gifts. But I want you
to notice that the Bible says that Abraham sent them away from Isaac, his son, and where did he
send them? Eastward unto the east country. And again, as you would think about the Arab nations
that would descend from these individuals, you would find
that in that region of the world there would be able to trace their lineage, etc., and so we find
that the place of where they were sent by Abraham is noted for us. And we see the descendants of
Abraham, and we know that as we continue through the scripture, I want you to really look at
verses 7 through 10, number 2 if you're taking notes, the death of Abraham. As we look at the
death of Abraham, I am encouraged, it's just a couple of verses of scripture, but I believe that
it's encouraging when you think about the opportunity to walk with the Lord and to live
a life that is well-pleasing. Notice what the Bible says in verses 7 and 8. The Bible says this,
and these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived, and hundred, threescore,
and fifteen years. Then Abraham gave up the ghost and died in a good old age, an old man,
and full of years, and was gathered to his people. When you think about someone that dies,
you understand that there are preparations that are made, even in our culture and our custom,
with having funeral services, etc. And if I were to look at verses 7 and 8 this evening,
I would look at those as really being a eulogy. And you think about the eulogy that would be
given, and obviously the length of eulogy here is quite short, but we find that God gives us
some very interesting things with regard to the life of Abraham. We find that he is 175 years
old, according to verse number 7, and we find that he walked with the Lord for a hundred years.
That's a lengthy period of time. You think about that, if you go all the way back to Genesis 12,
as I mentioned by way of introduction, that God calls Abram, and he calls him from the Ur of the
Chaldees, and over the next 100 years from that initial response, that call that God gave to
Abram in Genesis chapter number 12, all that we've read in all of these chapters, and watching
Abraham grow and develop, and thinking about the increase of his faith, and how God was
revealing himself to Abraham, and how wonderful that is. We begin to reflect on our own lives,
and we think about the journey that we're on, and we understand that no one's having a funeral
service this evening, but we begin to think about when was it that we started walking with God,
and however many days God would give us the length of our life, and to consider the opportunity that
we have to walk with him. It's interesting, I was just praying yesterday about the importance of
finishing well, and finishing strong, and understanding that it's good to start out
strong, it's good to start out well, but to finish well, to hear as Paul, as it's recorded for us in
2 Timothy chapter 4, to think about a life where he's finished his course. Not only did he finish,
but he kept the faith. And, you know, you can finish, but did you finish with the same beliefs
that you started with? Did you finish serving the Lord as faithfully as you started? And we find that
as we look at the life of Abraham, and we consider these 100 years of walking with God,
and you consider the mountaintops, and the valleys, and you consider great victories, you consider
the way in which God had revealed himself to Abraham, the names by which God gave to Abraham,
and describing the character, the very nature of God, and how he revealed himself to Abraham.
What a blessing! And, you know, we began as we looked and saw that God revealed himself as
El Elyon, and you think about God being the possessor of heaven and earth, and the impact
that that made upon Abraham. And then, of course, when he told him that his name was El Shaddai,
and you think about the truth that he is the Almighty God. Abraham was wavering at times, and
wondering as to the promise that God had given with regard to a descendant. We know that there
were times that he said, what about this, that's the servant that's born in my house? And God says,
no, that's not the way it's going to work. I'm going to give you a son, and Abraham,
you and Sarah will have a son. And you think about the way in which God was proving Abraham,
and the way in which God was showing us, even through the account of Scripture, the plan that
God has, and the ways in which we just walk with him and trust him, and find that he is always
faithful. It was in Genesis chapter 22 that we had the opportunity to read about the great test
that Abraham faced when God says, take thine son, thine only son, and go up to the mount that I'll
show thee of. And it was there that he was to offer Isaac as an offering. We find that it was
in that text of Scripture that we really find a mountain peak of faith in the life of Abraham,
where he believed that God would provide. And as we read the book of Hebrews in the 11th chapter,
we find that it's revealed to us there that Abraham understood that even if he had to kill
his son, that God was able to raise him up. And what faith! We mentioned this as we studied that
portion of Scripture a few weeks ago, and even as we've looked at the miracles of the Lord Jesus
Christ during our Sunday School series, and we've considered the fact that Abraham, at that
particular time, there's no one in recorded biblical history that had been raised from the dead,
but Abraham believed that God was able. What faith! And we read about all of these events,
and we read of the record that God has given us of these hundred years, and we can rejoice,
and we can thank God for the testimony of this man Abraham. We find that it's in verse number eight
that the Bible describes it this way, and these are the days of, excuse me, verse number eight,
that Abraham gave up the ghost and died. Notice what it says, in a good old age, an old man. 175,
I guess that is pretty old, and he died an old man. And it says this, and full of years,
and was gathered to his people. It's interesting that phrase, full of years, the word full,
it literally means abounding or satisfied. And oftentimes when we read it as full of years,
we may think about it as really the quantity, but really, when we look at the text of Scripture,
we find that verse number seven and part of verse number eight deals with the quantity of life,
that he was 175 years old, that he was an old man, and we find the quantity of life,
but really, in that phrase in verse number eight, when it says, and full of years,
really what's being focused upon is the quality of life. Not only the quantity, but the quality.
To think about the satisfaction, to think about the abounding nature of Abraham's life. Remember,
it was back in Genesis 24, in verse number one, when the Bible tells us that Abraham was old and
well stricken in age, and the Lord had blessed Abraham in all things. What a great testimony.
The Lord had blessed Abraham in all things. God blesses, or the blessings of God, we think,
and we mention, and we thank God for his blessings, and we are encouraged through song to
count your blessings, name them one by one. I mentioned last week how that the reality is that
there are times in which our understanding or definition or description of a blessing may differ
from what God would look at as being a blessing. There are times when God says no, and I would
submit to you this evening that that's a blessing. We say, no, I want God to say yes. Sometimes God
says no, and that's a blessing, and we need to thank God for it, and we think about the trials
and difficulties and how God is growing us and developing us, and we find the blessings that God
had bestowed upon Abraham. As we look at the Word of God, I want you to consider this truth that
Moses gives us in Deuteronomy. Turn to the 11th chapter, if you will. We'll be back to Genesis
here in just a moment, but I want you to think about this when the Bible tells us that God blessed
him, and we understand the content of what God is telling us, and really the summary of the life of
Abraham, and to think about the blessing of God upon him that the Lord had blessed Abraham in all
things, and we find that in Deuteronomy chapter 11, and this is a biblical principle that we find
throughout the Word of God. I want you to notice, begin looking with me in verse number 26 of
Deuteronomy 11. The Bible says this, "'Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse.'"
That sounds like a pretty good deal. There's a blessing and a curse, and so I want the blessing,
right? If we took and pretended this evening, used our sanctified imaginations to say
that there were two lines and a header over the door where the line would be formed, and
the description of that particular door, one says, "'Blessing, enter here,' and the other says,
"'Cursing, enter here.'" You'd be crazy to get in the line that said, "'Cursing.'" Right? Somebody
thinks something's wrong with you. You say, but this line is shorter. There's a reason it's
shorter, amen? And you get in the line that says, "'Blessing.'" You say, yeah, that's what I'm
signing up for. I desire God's blessing upon my life. Do you desire the blessing of God upon your
life? Sure you do. The favor of God, the blessing of God, knowing that all that
God gives us is for our good and for his glory, amen? And we say, God, I want your
blessing, I want your favor upon my life. But as we know that as Moses is giving
this instruction to the children of Israel, and he's saying to them as
they're preparing for entering into the land of promise, he says this in verse
27, a blessing if you obey the commandments of the Lord your God which
I command you this day. So we'd find that blessing is directly tied to obedience,
correct? A blessing if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God which
I command you this day. He says today, listen, behold, I set before you this day
a blessing and a curse. A blessing, but it's tied directly to obedience. Notice
in verse 28, and a curse if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your
God, but turn aside out of the way which I command you this day to go after other
gods which you have not known. As you study the history of Israel through the
Old Testament, you'll find there are many times in which they obeyed God. They had
the favor of God, they had the blessing of God. You find, however, that with much
frequency you read that the nation of Israel disobeyed the commandments of the
Lord, correct? Often, as you read the accounts throughout the Word of God of
the disobedience of the people of God to the commandments of God, it was not the
fact that the commandments were not known to the people of God, it was not
that they were not given the truth, it was that they chose to disobey. It was
that they rebelled against what God said and we find that there would be cursing,
there would be judgment, there would be opposition and adversity, and we find
that they would deal with great troubles and trials and various levels of
opposition. We find eventually, of course, as you note, the nation of Israel as a
whole, and you think about the divided kingdom and, of course, the ten tribes of
the north being taken captive by the Assyrians, and years later, Judah, the
tribes in the south, being taken captive by the Babylonians. Why? Because of their
disobedience. When Jeremiah is prophesying to the nation of Judah on
the eve of the Babylonian captivity, he's seeking to encourage them to trust the
Lord and we find that God is revealing to Jeremiah and Jeremiah sees the
Babylonians have laid siege against the city and he understands the the days are
coming in which they'll be taken captive and there are people, the king
and others, that would come and say, is there a word from the Lord? The word's
not changed, you've disobeyed and judgment is coming. Will God fight for us?
And Jeremiah says, actually God will fight against you. Wow, what tragic news
received that God Almighty would fight against them, but it was because of their
disobedience. And so when we see the life of Abraham and we see the eulogy that is
provided and we think of the quantity of life, but we also think of the the
quality of life, that he was full of years, that he was both abounding and
satisfied, the reality that he had walked with God and that he had seen and
experienced the blessing of God and that God had blessed him in all things, and we
understand this evening that the blessing of God is tied to obedience.
It's a biblical truth all throughout the pages of Scripture and how vital it
is that we make that decision that we would obey the Lord, follow his word, I
will obey, and what a place to be. We find that it's in James chapter
number 2 and the the New Testament truth that is given to us here, what a
powerful verse of Scripture where the Bible says that the Scripture was
fulfilled which saith Abraham believed God and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness and he was called the friend of God. In James 2 and verse
number 23, Abraham was called the friend of God. I'm thankful for the life of
Abraham and as we think about the eulogy and we think about and even reflect
upon our own lives, you'll recall that in Genesis chapter 23 as we looked at the
life of Sarah and the death and the burial of Sarah that we mentioned that
we're told by Solomon that it's better that we would go to the house of mourning
than to the house of feasting, and we understand that the reason that it's
better, that it's more advantageous for us to go to the house of mourning
than to the house of feasting is because that is the end of all men. Man goes to
his long home. And as we think about the life of Abraham and we look at just a
couple of verses of Scripture but really consider in very brief overview fashion
the the hundred years that are summarized in these chapters in the
book of Genesis where God allows us to have insight to the life and experiences
of Abraham, I wonder this evening how it is that at the time of our death what
will the eulogy sound like? What is it that that someone would say of us when
they look at our life? Would they look at our life as being a testimony of a life
that that was lived for the Lord? A life, a testimony of a believer that trusted
the Lord, that followed the Lord, that had faith? Oh not anyone that's perfect for
we know that none of us are perfect. But we've come to the place where we've
yielded and we've surrendered and we have sought to walk with God and we've
desired and longed for that blessing of God upon our lives. We find that Abraham
had a wonderful testimony. We find not only as you would think about a death
and a funeral, you think of the eulogy but you also think of the burial and we
find it in verses 9 and 10 God gives us the record of the burial of Abraham. The
Bible says that his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him and so we find that in
the beginning of verse number 9 that the people that are involved are revealed to
us and we find here that the Bible tells us that Isaac and Ishmael buried him in
the cave of Machpelah. Now it's interesting that Isaac and Ishmael are
now referenced in this portion of scripture. We find that of course at this
particular time when you do all of the calculations in determining the death of
Abraham and his age being a hundred and seventy-five years old that Isaac at
this time is 75 and Ishmael is 89. Now if you go back to the 21st chapter of the
book of Genesis that's where we read of the birth of Isaac and you'll remember
that as we went through the portion of scripture that we come down and you find
that in verse number 8 of Genesis 21 the Bible says the child grew speaking
of Isaac and was weaned and Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isaac
was weaned and Sarah saw the son of Hagar that's Ishmael the Egyptian which
she had born unto Abraham mocking and it was at that time in which Sarah said
cast out this bondwoman and her son. In verse number 10 we see that and we find
that Sarah said for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son
even with Isaac. We referenced this a few moments ago but looking at it in
more detail here we find that God also says to Abraham because it was something
that was grievous in the sight of Abraham and verse number 11 tells us
that that God says to Abraham let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the
lad and because of thy bondwoman and all that Sarah hath said unto thee hearken
unto her voice for in Isaac shall thy seed be called. We find that Abraham
according to verse number 14 rose up early in the morning and took bread and
a bowl of water and gave it unto Hagar putting it on her shoulder and the child
and sent her away and she departed and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.
And so we studied this and we looked at this portion of scripture and as we
understand the the truth that God has given us and now we find in this portion
of scripture in which we're looking at tonight at the death and the burial of
Abraham that now Isaac is 75 and Ishmael is 89 but when we look at Genesis
chapter number 21 and we look at all that's going on we talked about the age
of Ishmael at that particular time and we said that Ishmael would be between
16 and 17 years old and so from that time Isaac just a few years old
according to historical tradition and so now over 70 years has passed because
what happened with Ishmael well as we mentioned by way of introduction Ishmael
and Hagar they were sent and they went to the wilderness of Paran and we find
now that at the burial of Abraham that Isaac and Ishmael are there together. Now
it's of note because we find that of course many of us do not
many things from our toddler years from the age of two or three. It's not common
for us to have memories of those particular events. Oftentimes I find in
my own life at least that when we talk about things that we remember from those
ages it's typically from hearing stories and what have you and you begin to
rehearse some of those things. But some of us have had conversations what's the
earliest memory that you have as a child and so on and so forth and we try to
figure out how old we were and so on and so forth and some of you say I don't
remember yesterday so I'm not sure what my earliest memory was I understand but
but what I'm saying to you this evening is that a lengthy period of time has
passed at least 70 years 70 72 years has passed from the time in which Ishmael is
cast out and now the death of Abraham and I make that statement because as we
look at the portion of Scripture here the Bible tells us in verse number nine
and his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him there does not seem as we look at
the text of Scripture there's no animosity whatsoever that is hinted at
in the text of Scripture none in fact as we would study the scriptures I find
oftentimes that we will and I've been guilty of this myself of making
statements about the hostilities between the descendants of Isaac and the
descendants of Ishmael but if you study the scriptures you actually find and I
think even when you study history will prove this to be the case and we'll
study this as we continue through the book of Genesis you will find that
there's a whole lot more animosity between the descendants of Jacob and the
descendants of Edom you read of that regularly you read even of the animosity
that we spoke about in the beginning of Genesis 25 with the descendants of
Ketorah and thinking of Midian and the Midianites and so we see that here in
this portion of Scripture it seems as if it's not even hinted at that there's any
animosity whatsoever between Isaac and Ishmael they're there together burying
Abraham so we see the people that are involved we see the place it's the cave
of Machpelah we find that it says in the field of Ephraim the son of Zohar the
Hittite which is before Mamre and then the Bible tells us in verse number 10
referencing back to what we studied in Genesis 23 the field which Abraham
purchased of the sons of Heth there was Abraham buried and Sarah his wife and so
we find that as we look at this portion of Scripture we've seen now the
descendants we've seen the death the eulogy the burial of Abraham and we find
that a great patriarch has now passed off the scene this life we understand
the Bible teaches us that the wages of sin is death we understand that that
contains the the truth of the second death but also that by sin comes death
we understand physical death in the Bible tells us in Hebrews 9 as and it's
appointed unto man wants to die after this the judgment and we understand this
evening that we're not gonna live forever amen I'm gonna live forever I've
often said to people over the years are you prepared to die if you were to die
today we say that to people we sang songs this evening evangelistic songs
about the gospel and about whosoever will and Christ receive its sinful men
and what great songs they are and the reality is that we understand
biblically that there's a time to be born and there is a time to die we have
an appointment and as I think about that I've often said to people over the years
are you prepared for that appointment are you prepared for it and we
understand this evening the importance of trusting Christ as our Savior to
understand that my sins have been forgiven that I've been born again that
heaven is my home that I have that assurance that confidence and as we look
at the life of Abraham here and we read of his death and his burial we're once
again confronted with the brevity of life you say the brevity of life is 175
years old in comparison to eternity it's a very short the life span of
mankind today is even shorter and when we look at it in comparison with
eternity it's just that long and so often we spend so much time with that
long and forget about the eternity part of it I've said over the years that
there are many times in which especially being guilty of this and in our country
in our culture and I understand it's where we are it's what we're confronted
with but so often there is so much attention and so much emphasis that is
placed upon retirement planning but very little on eternity planning I would say
to you this evening I've said this before but I'd say it again this evening
that retirement is not certain eternity is certain and there's so much emphasis
placed upon retirement planning estate planning all of these things I'm not
suggesting that you shouldn't plan but I'm just suggesting that the emphasis
placed upon it might need to be re-evaluated because there's so much
emphasis on the retirement planning part and again very little on the eternity
planning part and I'm thankful that God tells us that we can store up treasure
in heaven amen what a blessing to think about the the dividends of of that type
of planning and to understand that as we walk with God as we faithfully serve God
that we can hear well done thou good and faithful servant that we can receive
even as we looked at a few weeks ago from Colossians 4 and understanding the
reward of the fellow worker and understanding that God has given us in
his word record of crowns that can be received and Paul was confident of
receiving a crown he mentions it in 2nd Timothy 4 and verse number 8 that crown
of righteousness and we think about those crowns they're not for us to keep
but for us to cast at the at the very throne of our God and what a blessing
and to have that perspective see eternity is certain Abraham wasn't
gonna live forever he lived 175 years old it's a long time but really just
that long in light of eternity and for us this evening when we read a passage
of scripture like this I hope that we would be confronted and we would be
aware of our own mortality in our own life and the brevity of our life and
that we would reevaluate we'd look and say what is it that's going to be said
at the end of my life how is it that that by life will be remembered who is
it that that I'm impacting what is the testimony of my life how is it that it
would it be said that I lived a life of faith that I lived in fear what will be
said it's very unusual for an individual to pen their own eulogy
happens just a little unusual this evening we think about not only what
others would say of us but as I've mentioned before what God would say what
God would say and tonight I hope that we'd be challenged as the thought of
even looking at this testimony of Abraham we finish in verse number 11
this evening and it kind of almost seems as if it's a little bit of an addendum
but it's a quite an interesting phrase that is used here if you are taking
notes I would give a third point this evening as being the distinct air the
Bible says this and it came to pass after the death of Abraham and so we've
read of the descendants we've read of the death we've understood the eulogy
the burial we see the the people involved with the burial the place of
the burial and we find that God says it came to pass after the death of Abraham
notice this it says that God blessed his son Isaac and Isaac dwelt by the well
le hey I row I and as we look at the that that phrase right in the middle of
the verse it says that God blessed his son Isaac we speak about the distinct
air we find that here in verse number five we've read a few moments ago where
the Bible says that Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac we've read back
in chapter number 21 where God says to Abraham to cast out the Ishmael and
Hagar why for an Isaac shall thy seed be called we find that in the middle of
Genesis chapter 25 the text in which we'll study next week that the Bible
gives us in verses 12 through 18 the the descendants of Ishmael and discusses for
us the death of Ishmael but really as we look at verse number 11 of Genesis 25
apart from those next several verses of Scripture what we find happens is the
focus of Scripture now shifts from the life of Abraham to the life of Isaac and
we find that this happened remember as we studied back in Genesis chapter 11
for just a moment turn back there if you will and I want you to just notice what
God is giving us in chapters really chapters 10 and 11 of the book of
Genesis you begin to read of these genealogies and all of the the sons of
Japheth and the sons of Ham and the sons of Shem and you read of all of these
descendants and then we find at the end of chapter number 11 that the Bible
gives us all the descendants
of Shem, and it begins to provide us with all of these names and all of these
years and all that's taken place, and we find that we come to this place where
the Bible tells us in verse number 26 of Genesis 11, and Terah lived 70 years and
begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran, and we find that it's at that point that the Bible
begins to focus its attention on Abram, on Abraham. We find even as we
studied and looked throughout the text of Scripture, beginning in those messages
at that particular place in the book of Genesis, how that the Hebrew race and the
promise that God had given with regard to the Lord Jesus Christ and the line,
the messianic line, and all of the prophecies of Scripture, and we find how
that the broadness of the scope of Genesis 10 and Genesis 11 of
understanding the genealogies and all of these descendants and so on, and it
just zeroes in on Abraham, and we read all of these chapters and all of these
events of a hundred years of the life of Abraham. Remember it was that God said
this as we read Galatians, and just hold your place, yeah, just turn over to
Galatians, you don't need to hold your place in Genesis anymore, but go over to
Galatians, if you will, and I want you to know what God tells us here in the book
of Galatians in chapter number 3, and we find again how the the attention of
Scripture, the focus of Scripture from Abraham now shifting to Isaac, and we see
this in Galatians 3 and verse number 16. Notice what the Bible says,
"...now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made." Notice what it says, "...he
saith not unto seeds, plural, as of many, but as of one, and to thy seed, which is
Christ." We've mentioned in the past the phraseology of the title of a book that
was written by William Scroggie, the unfolding drama of redemption, and we
find how God, no doubt He could have given us all of the history of any of
the other descendants that He chose to give us because He knows everything, but
in His plan, in His plan of redemption, the Messianic line, the birth of
Christ, we find that the shift of Scripture, the focus now shifts from that
of Abraham to Isaac specifically. Just a few verses given to us with regard to
the descendants of Ishmael and the death of Ishmael, and then you begin to read
about Isaac, you begin to read about his life, and then you begin to read about
his sons, and you begin to read about Israel as a nation and the twelve tribes,
the twelve sons, and you see the focus. And Matthew 1 says this, and we'll close
with this text of Scripture as we think about the truth that God has
given us with regard to the shift of Scripture and understanding that Isaac
is the distinct heir. We find that the Bible tells us this in Matthew 1.
Matthew 1, beginning in verse number 1, the book of the generation of Jesus
Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham. Abraham begat Isaac. Is that what it
says in verse number 2? And Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judas and his
brethren. We're not gonna go down through all of the text of Scripture here, but we
find that focus of Scripture. Why? Because it's showing us that messianic line in
which Jesus Christ would come to this earth, God in flesh. We find that it's in
verse number 16, it says, "...and Jacob begat Joseph, the husband of Mary, of whom was
born Jesus, who is called Christ." So all the generations from Abraham to David
are 14 generations, and from David until the carrying away into Babylon are 14
generations, and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are 14
generations. I'm so thankful that God has given us a record, the Word of God, the
pure Word of God. He's given us a record of these descendants and how He's
promised the birth of Christ, and through the pages of Scripture we can trace and
route and understand what God is doing and how God is working. This evening, as
we look at this portion of Scripture, we think about the death of Abraham, I'll
just close with saying this, we can rejoice in the testimony of a life well
lived. We can rejoice. Listen, it's a blessing to be able to go. I went to a
funeral not long ago, and you know, when you attend a funeral service, there are
times in which there's, it's a home-going service, I mean, it's a
wonderful rejoicing time of knowing that the individual walked with God and
served God, and they're now with God, and what joy. And I had the privilege of
attending such a funeral not long ago, and it was just a sweet service, a
testimony of a faithful follower of Jesus Christ. That's my desire. A pastor
friend that was there, it was for Pastor Mike Reed's wife, and Mrs. Reed, we prayed
for her for a long time, Mrs. Reed went home to be with the Lord, and man, it was
a wonderful, wonderful service. And a pastor friend that was sitting next to
me at that funeral, he tapped me on the arm at the end, he said, this is what all
of us should desire in a funeral service, a celebration of a life that was lived
for Christ. And as we think about Abraham, and we think about the life of
Abraham, we ought to rejoice in a life lived for the Lord, a life in which he
followed the Lord. He went out not knowing where he went, just following the
Lord. And he saw God do some amazing things. Was he perfect? No, not by far. Can
we find critique? Can we find criticism? Can we poke at and say, look at this
failure, and look at that? Absolutely. There's flaws. He's a man. But we find
that he's the friend of God. He's in Hebrews 11. He had great faith. We say,
man, I desire that when I die, I don't know when it's gonna be, could be tonight,
probably you're not gonna live to 175. But whatever the time is, that I would
decide that I want to follow the Lord, all in, all for him, because I want to
have a life that's well lived. Let's pray together. Father, we love you. We thank
you for loving us. We thank you for the life of Abraham. And as we look at this
portion of Scripture, we're encouraged. But I would admit this evening that in
addition to being encouraged, we are challenged in our own lives. And I pray
that we'd take a few moments by way of invitation tonight to evaluate our own
lives, to consider our own mortality. I trust that each one that's gathered here
this evening knows you as their personal Lord and Savior. But if there might be
one that's not sure of heaven, it'd be our prayer that tonight they'd be saved.
With the thought that primarily we're speaking to believers this evening, I
pray that we would be purposed in our lives. That we'd find that it was not by
accident that Paul was able to say that he finished his course. For he set out
and declared this purpose in Acts 20, that I might finish my course with joy.
And God, I pray that for each one of us this evening, we know not how much longer
we have in this race. We know not when our course will end. It is my prayer that
each of us would have a desire to finish our course with joy. That we'd seek to
walk with you and obey you. That we'd be doers of the Word. That your favor would
be upon us, because we walk in obedience. We pray that you'd move and work as only
you can. We'll thank you for every decision that's made, for it's in Christ's
name we pray.